# To the Reader.

IT is more than a Year since, I began a Morning-Exercise on the Lord's-Day at seven a Clock, when I entred upon an Ex∣position of all the Parables and express Similitudes contained in the four Evangelists, according to the measure of Light and Knowledge received; though by reason of a Journey into the Coun∣try it has not been continued.\* The Explication of this Parabolical Speech of our Saviour, I have been prevailed with to make publick. And if this meets with Acceptance, I may in a short time publish Proposals for printing the whole; which in regard of the greatness of the Charge, cannot be done but by Subscriptions. And though I must confess my Ability to perform so great a Work to be much in∣feriour to many others; yet by God's Assistance I shall do what I can.

And the Consideration of the kind Acceptance my other Labours have had amongst God's People, has caused me to take the more pains: God having blessed the Writings of divers of his Servants to the Conversion of many Souls, and Comfort of others; yet if I have not sufficient encouragement from Christian Friends, I must desist this great Essay.

Reader; The second Sermon I have much enlarged, scarcely half of it was delivered when preach'd, thinking to have preached a third time upon the Text, but was prevented by laying down that Lecture, for the Reason afore-mentioned: Neither have I been so large on other Parables already opened, nor intend to be on those I purpose to explain; so that the first Sermon is rather a proper Specimen of the whole Work than the second.

As touching some part of this dark Parabolical Saying of our Sa∣viour, I may differ in my Conceptions, 'tis probable, from divers Men; 〈…〉 inclined, 'tis like, to believe that the Man, or Men here mentioned, are such only that Satan overcomes, after they have made a profession of Religion, with the same scandalous Sins, and so they turn with the Dog to their old Vomit. I grant this may be true in respect of some of them; yet I do not believe the Lord Jesus intends to shew

hereby they do all after manner fall from their 〈◊〉 Religion and Profession: 'Tis evident to me, he applies it to the Pharisees, and other People of that Generation; but many of them never became open∣ly Prophane, yet was their State worse by many degrees, \(than whilst they abode under the Power of gross and scandalous Sins\) and died in their Vnbelief and Hypocrisy, which 'tis to be feared many now do. If the Scope of the 〈◊〉, be considered, That our blessed Saviour designed by this Parable to see 〈◊〉 the State of the Pharisees, is evident, as may be seen if you begin at the 24th Verse of the Chapter, where they charged him with casting out Devils by B••lzebub the Prince of the Devils. From whence his 〈◊〉 an occasion to set forth the sadness of their Conditions, 〈…〉 Zeal and outward Sanctity, shewing〈◊〉 Vers. 33, 34, 35. that their Hearts were not made good, but like an Evil and corrupt Tree. Then soon af∣ter follows these words, When the Unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, &c. Reader, I shall not trouble thee further: what Weakness thou findest in these Sermons, I hope Chairty will 〈◊〉 it: If any Profit thou shalt receive thereby, bless God, and be 〈…〉 of resting in a Form of Religion, being not brought into 〈◊〉 Union with Jesus Christ, nor under the Power of true 〈…〉 let me have a part in thy Prayers, who is 〈…〉 them, being attended with many Troubles and 〈…〉, but doubt not but God will make them all work together for good, and will at last, I hope, through his infinite Grace, bring to his quiet, peaceable, and everlasting Rest,

His poor Servant, thy unworthy Friend and Brother in the Gospel, BENJ. KEACH.

From my House near Horsly∣down,this 27th of the 3d Month, called May, 1691.

